---
layout: post
title: "Ritchie-Thompson-OS"
date: 2023-04-22
published: true
---

When it comes to computer operating systems, I guess the two names that may immediately come to our mind are (well, obviously) Microsoft Windows and Apple MacOS. I currently use a Mac, but not until learning about the history of operating systems (OSes) did I really get to know the OS in my machine regarding what it really is and its origin. Let me tell you it’s time to laugh at my face all the ways you want, because I felt dumb discovering all MacOS machines are certified UNIX systems. As a computer science student, I’ve been running Unix commands using Mac terminals all the time for assignments, without questioning why such simple but powerful commands could be run so smoothly on a MacOS machine. I’m not sure if I could be any smarter after this blog post, but I want it to be specially dedicated to Unix, one of the best inventions ever. Most of the following content is based on a journal article namely ‘The UNIX Time-Sharing System’ written by Ritchie and Thompson, the fathers of UNIX, published on Communication of the ACM in July 1974. I also incorporate some pieces I found on unix.org, as well as some interesting examples and applications of UNIX presented in documentaries about the Bell Labs. 

So, first thing first, why UNIX? (We always need context, don’t we? Or at least I do because I love context). I think all tech people would agree that software has to be constantly adapted to meet the changing needs of customers. Also, there was urgent needs for a large amount of software to assist people with such repetitive tasks as doing admin tasks or payroll. Meanwhile there was a problem in programming productivity (I guess in some CS class we all heard about the software crisis). In short, human software engineers can’t write all the programs we need. There is an interesting analogy about this: we know it was impossible to have everyone work as an operator back in the olden days, but we really needed the whole US population to do the job of switching phone calls so that we can switch all the calls we need. In short, we needed something that can boost programming productivity and there came UNIX.

Now, what exactly is UNIX? According to Ritchie and Thompson (1974), it is a “general-purpose, multi-user, interactive operating system” written in C language, which makes the whole system ‘portable’. This system essentially supports communal computing and communication between users. The two men first started out in 1969, with the aim to simplify many aspects of interactions between human and the computer. They wanted to keep the structure as simple and primitive as possible. Basically, there are 3 layers: the kernel that controls all system resources; a shell that acts as a user interface; and utilities including editors and compilers for programming languages, document formatting programs, and programs you write yourself. 

These system programs can be considered basically as building blocks with which you can create things. What makes UNIX different is that these building blocks can be glued together in different ways, some are unobvious, making it a greatly flexible system. I am particularly impressed with the concept of pipelining: we can pipe (|) the output of a command, make it the input of the next command to create a flow of data. The system makes sure this process is synchronized. This is productive because we can make use of the things people have already built. To be honest, this idea of piping is not completely new to me, but I have little experience using UNIX for large projects, so I was not really aware of how powerful it is until learning about its real life applications. Some routine procedures can be long chunk of commands piping together. The solution for this is to put these chunks into a file and tell the shell to execute that file. And voila! I wish life could be that easy. 

The version discussed in their AMC article (1974) was developed for the Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-11/40 and 11/45 computers. To beginning users, the feature that characterizes UNIX is (1) a hierarchical file system which can be accessed through a command line interface. That is just one out of 5 other bullet points listed out in the article, which are: (2) compatible file, device, and inter process I/O; (3) the ability to run asynchronous processes; (4) users can select their own command language and (5) it has over 100 subsystems using a dozen languages.  

I decided not to go into great details regarding hardware and software environment of the PDP-11/45 because what we are using today is way different. However, back then the system (16-bit word, 8-bit byte) has a 144k bytes of core memory and UNIX occupied 42K, which is around less than a third of space in memory. 

Now let’s dive into the most notorious part of UNIX: the file system, which is considered the heart of UNIX. The reason UNIX is ubiquitous is the storage of this file system. It does not take into account how large a file is, or how many rows or columns it has. An oversimplified example is the real-life file system in a cabinet, where we have folders with tags (that can be in alphabetical order); and in each folder we have sheets of paper as files. They use the word “oversimplified” since the physical folders’ capability is limited, while the that of the file system’s folders is not. The UNIX terms for folders are directories, and we can have subdirectories for different groups of files. Of course, we can create or remove our directories, but the system itself has several directories for its own use. One of these is the root directory, which is, as the name suggested, the start of everything. There is another system directory containing all the programs required for general use; that is, all the commands. We can use the special entry ‘.’ to refer to the current working directory and ‘..’ for its parent directory without having to specify the directory name. Regarding files, we have ordinary and special files. Ordinary files can be text files or programs we write, and their structure is determined by the programs that use them, not by the system. Special files, on the other hand, are used to handle I/O. Each I/O device is associated with at least one such file. Files and I/O are now treated the same way, which is such an amazing feature. 

Now you may ask, what about protection, especially when we are in a shared system? Well, each user is assigned a unique ID number, and it is attached to the files when they are created. Normal levels of permission consist of read, write, and execute. However, in many applications, we need a more flexible permission structure, so UNIX includes a permission bit called set-user-ID bit. If this bit is set for an executable file, for example, whenever a user other than the owner executes the files, that user acquires all privileges of the owner. The command to do this is chmod (surprised!). 
	
This post seems long enough, and I need to go to bed soon so that I won’t skip another morning class. So, I would like to sum up UNIX in 3 words: simply, user friendly, and productive. Because it is a time-sharing system, humongous tasks can be divided into subtasks to work on by multiple people at a time through a pleasant user interface. Scientists at Bell Labs said UNIX was successful not because of what Ritchie and Thompson put into it, but what they left out of it. All they use was a small number of primitives, which could be perfectly fitted together to accomplish complicated tasks such as building parsers, compilers, or circuits. Its simplicity gives leverage for everybody, and that is why although it started out as two-men effort, we now have families of UNIX programs developed from the original system. 

References

AT&T Archives: The UNIX System: Making Computers More Productive. (n.d.). Retrieved April 24, 2023, from https://techchannel.att.com/play-video.cfm/2012/2/22/at&t-archives-the-unix-system
AT&T Tech Channel (Director). (2012, February 22). AT&T Archives: The UNIX Operating System. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tc4ROCJYbm0
AT&T Tech Channel (Director). (2014, January 27). UNIX: Making Computers Easier To Use -- AT&T Archives film from 1982, Bell Laboratories. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XvDZLjaCJuw
Dennis M. Ritchie. (n.d.). Retrieved April 22, 2023, from https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~bwk/dmr.html
Dennis M. Ritchie—A.M. Turing Award Laureate. (n.d.). Retrieved April 22, 2023, from https://amturing.acm.org/award_winners/ritchie_1506389.cfm
National Inventors Hall of Fame - NIHF (Director). (2019, February 18). Pushing the Limits of Technology: The Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie Story. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g3jOJfrOknA
Ritchie, D. M., Thompson, K., & Laboratories, B. (1974). The UNIX Time- Sharing System. 17(7).
The UNIX System—History and Timeline—UNIX History. (n.d.). Retrieved April 22, 2023, from https://unix.org/what_is_unix/history_timeline.html


